
Essay Review

ROY PORTER (editor), Patients and practitioners. Lay perceptions of medicine in pre-industrial
society, Cambridge University Press, 1986, 8vo, pp. vi, 356, ?27.50.

Traditional history of medicine has recently come under a barrage of attacks. It has been too
whiggish, too scientistic, too iatrocentric and narrow in outlook. Counter-attacks have been
mounted to promote new ways of exploring and demystifying the discipline. Iconoclasticism is
in. But in spite of the new brooms, the patient has been studiously ignored. This admirable series
of essays is therefore devoted to the history of medicine from the patients' point of view showing
that "the sick in past time constitute important objects of historical study." Studies based on
such an approach, will, it is suggested, open up new areas in the history of illness and medical
care through a new emphasis on the viewpoint of the sufferer rather than the healer. Like all
good ideas, those that inspired this volume seem obvious when stated, although, as Porter warns
us in his introduction, "no grand theory animates this book, no grand generalisations emerge".
More modestly, he suggests that "these essays are perhaps best seen as pilot and preliminary
studies".

The main questions, therefore, which these essays address are those concerned with people's
perceptions of illness, childbirth, and death. What did people do if they fell sick, and if they
employed "doctors" or "healers" (however these were defined for different countries at different
times) what was their view of them and their methods? Was sickness perceived and described in
medical, religious or magical terms, and was it met with fatalistic resignation and an implicit lack
of "faith" in the orthodox practitioner? Answers are sought in areas as diverse as the relationship
of medicine to religion, the influence of customs and rites surrounding birth and death, cultural
interpretations of illness, the nature and extent of self-treatment, and the persistence of ancient
traditional medicine in modern times.

Here, then, a wide range of issues is based on a wide range of sources. A major difficulty, of
course, is the familiar one of literate selection where generalizations are made on the basis of
records of a literate minority. It is a commonplace, for instance, that we can know little, in the
direct sense, of the experience of illness amongst the poor. But even with the literate minority
there is the problem that on so many occasions diaries and letters which may be richly
informative on the social and economic details of daily life seem disappointing when it comes to
personal accounts of illness. The experience of illness due to chronic disorders is often dreary as
well as painful. Day-by-day records may consist of little more than brief and repetitious notes of
the same old symptoms and the same old medicines. A load of ore must be sifted for a light
dusting of gold.

Two themes, however, emerge from most of these essays. First, that it would be quite false to
draw sharp boundaries between lay and professional outlooks; secondly, that the intertwining of
religious experience and sickness experience is complex, but central to understanding the
difference between past and present attitudes to illness. Religious methods of coping with illness,
for example, were not at odds with orthodox medical ones. A sickness might be spoken of as
God's visitation on a sinner, and the outcome might be governed by the will of God; a powerful
reason, indeed, for resorting to prayer even when it was recognized that prayers from the
sick-bed were soon forgotton. Even the most pious, however, saw no reason to shun the
assistance of orthodox medicine. Wear's essay on the puritan perceptions of illness in the
seventeenth century is particularly good on this aspect. Scorning death-bed repentance as the
easy way out, some puritans treated every day as if it was their dying day, moving towards a
continual state of repentance and using their diaries as a record for God and themselves. But this
combination of prayer and medicine was more than hedging one's bets. Illness and death formed
part of the teaching of the church, and clergymen and physicians met frequently at the sick-bed.
Recovery from illness was a sure sign of God's favour, even if it was expressed through the skill
of the physician, so that a medical explanation and a medical cure were a tribute both to the
power of medicine and to God's mercy. Neither medicine nor religion held a monopoly in the
explanation or the management of illness in an individual or a community.

104

Essay Review

In eighteenth-century Germany, the intermingling of religion and medicine was, as
Geyer-Kordesch tells us, even more intense, leading to a denial of the distinction between psyche
and soma, between health and sickness. The inward scrutiny of the soul, along with the
acknowledgement of the frailty and illness of the total being, was combined, in the pious of
eighteenth-century Germany, with a compulsion to write it all down, spawning a type of
literature, part novel, part autobiography, in which illness was a central theme.

There could be no more compelling evidence of the absence of hard and fast distincitions
between lay and professional healers, or between medicine and religion, than Barry's account of
Dyer, a Bristol accountant who served briefly as an apothecary. Dyer practised medicine and
piety on a basis which included the magical and religious (his belief in the power of the devil and
spirits extended to belief in witchcraft) as well as the rational and scientific. What is more, his
excursions into medicine were undertaken with no sense of antithesis or of guilt at usurping the
regular faculty through failing to stick to his last. Barry makes the telling point that the growing
tendency through the eighteenth century for Bristol practitioners to talk in medical rather than
religious terms is not so much evidence of secularization as of religious pluralism. At the
sick-bed, practitioners needed to be all things to all men. They could not afford an overtly
religious vocabulary which might alienate potential customers. Certainly, the use of medical
terminology was not a process of erecting a mystique of specialized knowledge and medical
jargon to separate the laity from the members of the medical faculty. On the contrary, Porter,
through an analysis of the Gentleman's Magazine, stresses, like Barry, the deep involvement of
the laity in medical ideas. Medicine in the eighteenth century was a subject, like poetry or
politics, for open, if not equal discussion by any educated man, not just by the experts.
Sometimes too much has been made of this, with the suggestion that patients dictated the form
and content of the medical consultation to their physicians, and decided on the appropriate
treatment. The evidence does not support this view. But the open nature of medical discourse
certainly encouraged a flourishing trade in self-diagnosis and self-treatment. As Smith's account
of self-help and advice in the late eighteenth century shows, the number of do-it-yourself
manuals which were sold as guides for the preservation of health and treatment of sickness grew
steadily throughout the century. At first sight, this might be taken as evidence of wholesale
distrust of orthodox medicine, but most of these self-help publications either came from
orthodox medical authors or at least advised orthodox remedies. They were therefore, both a
tribute, and an alternative to orthodox medical care.

Nevertheless, a sceptical attitude towards orthodox medicine is a permanent feature of
medical care, even if it varies in degree. In ancient Rome, for example, where the "doctor" was
anyone who called himself such, the orthodox were forced to compete on the same level with
herb-cutters, gymnastic trainers, and druggists. Nutton relates how Pliny believed that medicine
as generally practised in the Rome of Nero and the Flavians was "wholesale murder and
unpunishable at that", and strongly advised his readers to treat themselves instead.

A sceptical attitude towards the doctor was often related more or less directly to the
widespread employment of self-help remedies, and to the absence of a clear-cut division between
the lay and professional healers. Ambivalent attitudes to practitioners are brought out in Joan
Lane's essay on the diaries and correspondence of eighteenth-century patients. This and other
essays could lead one to the conclusion that at all levels of pre-industrial society, where illness
was concerned, lay opinion was valued as highly as medical, quack as orthodox, and theories
based on religion or magic as much as those based on science. One can imagine the ill as being
faced with the same kind of choices as those setting out on a journey when the evidence suggests
that all routes are equally dangerous. Certainly, and understandably from our present
viewpoint, scepticism was rife from ancient Rome at least until the end of the eighteenth century.
Beier's account of the Josselin diary, for example, a diary which is unusually rich in medical
information, shows that in illness the ultimate trust was in God but help was still required from
earthly remedies. These remedies, however, were largely self-prescribed and the doctor was
seldom called. Again one is faced with the question, was this a typical response? Did everyone
behave in the same way? From the modern point of view, scepticism may appear to have been
justified in terms of the modern double-blind controlled trial. But this is simply the error of

105

Essay Review

backward projection. In every age, I suspect, a sceptical attitude towards orthodox medicine,
whether justified or not, is usually a luxury that only the healthy can afford, and only the
established practitioner can express. The trenchant aphorism-that while the difference between
a good doctor and a bad one is very large, the difference between a good doctor and no doctor at
all is often very small-was coined by an eighteenth-century practitioner, not a layman. It would
be a mistake to overestimate the scorn of the public for the orthodox doctor in the pre-industrial
age. Sometimes he was seen as no better at the business of curing than the quack; but, as Lane's
essay shows us, when illness struck, it was the regulars who were in constant demand, night and
day. As Richard Kay (not included in this volume) remarked in 1745, when his life consisted of
long days and interrupted nights in attendance on his patients, "I am sent for, I am called upon in
haste, I must go; we seldom have a leisure hour". There is no reason to believe that this was
exceptional. There were many ordinary and orthodox practitioners in the competitive and
commercial world of eighteenth-century England who were just as busy, making comfortable
incomes from treating a very wide section of society. Indeed, a high reputation for medical skill
was so much in demand that the riches of the elite physicians should not surprise us. All this
suggests that, to most of the fee-paying population, scepticism was little more than skin-deep.

In a volume notable for the wide range of sources and new ideas, the one feature which seems
to be muted is the central experience of illness itself. There is much on patients' perceptions of
medical men but little on the actuality of illness such as typhus, smallpox, or phthisis, and the
impact of such common and life-threatening diseases on the individual and the family. There are
glimpses here and there, but no systematic exploration of this theme. The result is a rather
sanitized account of illness from the patient's point of view, in which all traces of the offensive
smell of the sickroom have been banished. Studies of sickness in the past from this point of view
are admittedly not easy. Possibly for this reason, the spate of recent studies of illness in the past
have largely been statistical. Most are concerned with mortality rates. Only a few are concerned
with morbidity rates. These studies are undeniably welcome and important; but there has been
very little exploration of the experience of illness. It is true that patients who survive a major
episode of an acute illness seldom remember, or choose to remember, much about it. Memorable
accounts of acute illnesses are, therefore, seldom written by patients, but by practitioners; and
practitioners in the eighteenth century, especially, often wrote vivid jargon-free accounts of the
impact of illness on their patients. Also, they were often perceptive about their patients'
expectations. Was it felt by the authors that practitioners' perceptions of patients' perceptions of
illness were unacceptable? Was it decided that, being second-hand accounts, there should be an
embargo on medical sources in a volume devoted to medicine from the patient's point of view?
Can one justify a separation between medical and non-medical sources when, as Porter argues
cogently, "the history of sickness" needs to be drawn from "rich and varied sources"?

Wilson, for instance, contributes a memorable account of childbirth before the emergence of
man-midwifery. He uses anthropological concepts to demonstrate that childbirth in England
before the early eighteenth century was not so much a medical affair as a complex rite and an
exclusive ceremony from which men were rigidly excluded. When a serious complication
occurred, another midwife could be sent for without disrupting the conventions surrounding
childbirth. But if, in the end, there was no choice and a surgeon had to be summoned, the
intrusion of a man was justified only by the extreme circumstances of the need to preserve the
woman's life by extracting a dead baby with the blunt hook or crotchet-a terrifying outcome
which was totally destructive of the carefully conducted ceremony of childbirth. Through this
account-and, incidentally, through a parallel account by Laget of midwifery in France,
published in the Annales series-one can appreciate the magnitude of the change which
accompanied the birth of man-midwifery and the custom of employing medical men for normal
labours. It is in this essay that Wilson stakes his claim for a history of childbirth which is
"palpably more human" and not just a history of obstetric techniques. But his wholesale
condemnation of iatrocentric history as a necessarily whiggish version, moving inexorably
upwards to a present state of perfection, surely cannot be serious least of all in his chosen
subject.

These, however, are minor points of criticism in a volume notable for its rich variety and
orginal ideas. No one could quarrel with Porter's insistence that the stories of the sick deserve to

106

Essay Review?

be heard; nor with his warning that "the temptation to launch the history of sickness as yet
another self-cocooning, and hence sterile, historical subspecialty" must be avoided. The authors
have succeeded in achieving the editor's aim of showing the reader that "sickness was one of life's
dominating threats and key experiences. It is the hope of the volume to open eyes more fully to its
historical importance." It is also the hope that it will stimulate further research into this area of
medical history.

Irvine Loudon
Wellcome Unit for the History of Medicine, Oxford

107
