
Medical History, 1997, 41: 182-196

The Immunization of Cattle against Rinderpest in

Eighteenth-Century Europe

C HUYGELEN*

Rinderpest is caused by a morbillivirus closely related to the measles and canine
distemper viruses. The pathology and symptomatology of the three diseases are very
similar,1 but in terms of mortality, rinderpest is by far the most lethal; in European cattle
the death rate often exceeds 80 per cent. The disease was eradicated in Europe over a
hundred years ago, but in the eighteenth century an estimated 200 million cattle died from
it, and the rural economy of most European countries was profoundly affected by the
successive waves of epizootics.2 Many leaders of medical opinion became actively
involved in the study of these outbreaks, in part out of scientific interest, but also because
their assistance was requested by their respective governments. In the rural areas several
medical practitioners and even clergymen took an active interest in rinderpest because
they were directly confronted with the disastrous losses suffered by farmers. Cattle played
a key role in rural life not only as producers of meat and milk, but also as the main source
of manure. The severe losses stressed the need to have trained manpower to handle animal
disease and stimulated the creation of schools of veterinary medicine in the latter part of
the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth centuries. Most of the work on rinderpest
referred to in this article was carried out by medical men and some pharmacists, none of
whom had any specific training in animal diseases.3

Opinions on the cause of rinderpest have been reviewed against the background of the
mainstream infectious disease concepts of those days by Lise Wilkinson.4 In spite of the
lack of theoretical knowledge concerning the etiology of infectious diseases, a few

*Dr Vet. Med. C Huygelen, Vossekouter 29, B-3040
Huldenberg, Belgium.

I wish to thank Drs A H H M Mathijsen, former

librarian, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Utrecht, for his invaluable help in providing most
of the old Dutch publications, Prof. Dr Angela von
den Driesch, Director of the Institute fUr

Palaeoanatomie, Domestikationsforschung und

Geschichte der Tiermedizin der Ludwig-Maximilian-
Universitat, Munich, for giving me access to her

rich collection of rare German veterinary literature,

and Dr G Theves, Veterinary Services, Luxembourg,
for providing copies of articles from his own
private collection. I should also like to thank

Professor W F Bynum and the external referees
for their good advice and criticism; I am also

indebted to Ms Caroline Tonson-Rye for her editorial
expertise.

1 Kazuya Yamanouchi, 'Comparative aspects of
pathogenicity of measles, canine distemper and

rinderpest viruses', Japan. J. med. Sci. BioL, 1980,
33: 41-66.

2 G R Scott, 'Rinderpest virus', in Z Dinter and
B Morein (eds), Virus infections of ruminants,
Amsterdam, Elsevier, 1990, p. 343.

3 Leon Moule, 'Du r6le des m6decins dans la

lutte contre les 6pizooties au XVIIIe siecle. Premiere
partie. Peste bovine', Compt. Rendus 2e Congr int.
Hist. Me'd., Paris 1921. Evreux, Ch. H6rissey, 1922,
pp. 237-74. In this article the author gives a long,
though still very incomplete list of the leaders of

medical opinion involved in rinderpest research with
brief biographies and short descriptions of their work
in this field.

4 Lise Wilkinson, 'Rinderpest and mainstream
infectious disease concepts in the eighteenth
century', Med. Hist., 1984, 28: 129-50.

182

The Immunization of Cattle against Rinderpest

practical lessons had nevertheless been learned from past experience: isolation and
sanitary measures, when applied strictly, had been shown to be at least partially effective
in limiting the spread of human plague, and long experience with smallpox had taught that
one attack of the disease would protect for life; in addition, artificial smallpox inoculation
had been shown to provide protection and was becoming more popular towards the middle
of the century.

Bernardino Ramazzini had been the first to describe rinderpest, in 1712.5 He was the
principal professor of medicine at the University of Padua. He saw several similarities
between rinderpest and smallpox and his views were widely accepted. Giovanni Maria
Lancisi, the Pope's personal physician, recommended the slaughter of all infected and
exposed animals.6 This policy was undoubtedly the most logical approach to combat the
rinderpest epizootics, but it understandably met with much resistance and was therefore
applied only sparingly especially at the beginning; later in the century it would be used
successfully in several countries. In others, however, the measures were seen as too drastic
and costly; in addition, their strict application required a strong central authority, which
was often lacking, as in the United Dutch Provinces for example.

Against this background it was not surprising that attempts were made to apply the
inoculation principle to rinderpest, as it was extrapolated to measles by Francis Home a
few years later.7 Both diseases were seen as closely related to smallpox and one attack was
known to provide lifelong protection. Several of the most fervent and experienced
smallpox inoculators, like Pieter Camper in the Netherlands, became the most enthusiastic
promotors of applying the procedure to rinderpest, especially because all attempts to cure
the disease had failed; the whole range of the then known drugs used in human medicine
had been tried, all to no avail.8

Initial Inoculations in England and the Netherlands

The first written report of rinderpest inoculation was published as a letter signed "T.S."
in the November 1754 issue of the Gentleman's Magazine, a journal then widely read by
educated people not only in Britain, but also on the Continent. This magazine also actively
supported the progress of smallpox inoculation.9 In this context it was eager to publish
letters about the applications of the principle to other diseases. The author of the letter
reported that a Mr Dobson, a gentleman of Yorkshire, had inoculated his cattle and had
thus preserved nine out of ten of them.10 In the next issue of the journal, a correction
appeared stating that Mr Dobson was very surprised to see his name mentioned in

5 Bernardino Ramazzini, De contagiosa         9 Genevieve Miller, The adoption of inoculation
epidemia, quae in Patavino agro, et totafere Veneta  for smallpox in England and France, Philadelphia,

ditione in boves irrepsit, Padua, Conzatti, 1712.  University of Pennsylvania Press, 1957, p. 168. See

6 Giovanni Maria Lancisi, Dissertationes   also Roy Porter, 'Lay medical knowledge in the

historicae de bovilla peste, Rome, Salvieni, 1715.  eighteenth century: the evidence of the Gentleman's

7 Francis Home, Medicalfacts and experiments,  Magazine', Med. Hist., 1985, 29: 138-68, and idem,
London, A Miller, 1759.                      'Laymen, doctors and medical knowledge in the

8 G Theves, 'De la "maladie des betes a comes"  eighteenth century: the evidence of the Gentleman's
au Duche de Luxembourg pendant le XVIIIe siecle.  Magazine', in Roy Porter (ed.), Patients and

Traitement et prophylaxie', Ann. M6d. vft., 1994,  practitioners, Cambridge University Press, 1985.

138: 81-8, and Angela von den Driesch, Geschichte  10 Letter signed T.S., Gentleman's Mag., 1754, 24:
der Tiermedizin, Munich, Callwey, 1989, p. 180.  493.

183

C Huygelen

connection with the procedure. The letter stated that "Mr. Dobson lives in the city of York,
and is so far from having any stock of cattle, that he does not even keep a cow". The real
story Dobson had heard, was as follows:

Sir William St. Quintin, of Scampton in Yorkshire, inoculated eight calves, seven of which had the
distemper from the inoculation, and recovered, and were afterwards turned into a herd of infected
cattle, without being infected a second time; the other case was of an old ox, which was inoculated
at Malton, which had the distemper from inoculation, and recovered, and was afterwards turned into
a herd of infected cattle, but did not receive the infection a second time. Mr. Dobson had the
foregoing account from an eminent physician in Yorkshire, who told him the method of performing
the operation, and of treating the beast in distemper, which is as follows: First bleed the beast, and
from that time keep him from hay, and all dry meat, till he is quite recovered; and in order to keep
his body open, give him scalded bran, or chaff. At the end of three days make an incision in the
dewlap, into his wound put a piece of tow, dipped in the morbid matter discharged from the nostrils,
or eyes, of an infected beast, then stitch up the wound, and let the tow remain until the symptoms of
distemper appear, when the tow must be taken out; after turn the beast out to grass.11

In almost all later literature on rinderpest the first inoculations have been erroneously
attributed to Dobson, probably because the second letter went unnoticed; in addition, most
authors misspelled his name: "Dodson". Many also gave the incorrect date of 1744 instead
of 1754; few appear to have checked the original publications. Alois Kohl wrongly
attributed the first rinderpest inoculations to Ramazzini in 1711, followed by "Dodson" in
1744! 12

The letters in the Gentleman's Magazine inspired Stefan Weszpremi to write his
Tentamen de inoculanda peste. Weszpremi was a Hungarian physician, living in England,
who saw St Quintin's experiments as proof that inoculation could be applied successfully
to diseases other than smallpox, and who proposed to widen the field of application to
measles and to human plague.'3 As mentioned above, the first actual measles inoculations
were performed by Home three years later. 14

Johann Christian Polykarp Erxleben, professor at the Georg Augustus University and
the Royal Institute for Historic Sciences at Gottingen, briefly mentioned some rinderpest
inoculations in Brunswick in 1746 in which 9 out of 19 cattle survived,15 but I have been
unable to find any further details or reports on these trials, and other German authors, like
Claus Dethloff von Oertzen, do not mention them at all.'6

After the initial limited experiments in England, the focus of activity shifted to the
Netherlands. In early 1755 funds were raised there for the purpose of purchasing cattle for
an inoculation experiment, to be carried out in Beverwijk by Corneel Nozeman, Agge
Roskam Kool and Jan Tak. Nozeman was a teacher in Haarlem and the two others
physicians in Leiden. In the preface to their publication the authors stated that neither
before nor during their experiment had they had any knowledge of the report in the

" Letter to Mr Urban, Gentleman's Mag., 1754,  15 Johann Christian Polykarp Erxleben,

24: 549.                                     Praktischer Unterricht in der Vieharzneykunst,

12 Alois Kohl, Encyklopadie der gesammten  Gottingen and Gotha, J C Dieterich, 1771, p. 205-23.
Thierheilkunde, Vienna and Leipzig, M Perles, 1891,  16 Claus Dethloff von Oertzen, Oeffentliche

vol. 8, p. 468.                              Bekanntimachung der nunmehr sattsam erprobten

13 Stephanus Weszpr6mi, Tentamen de inoculanda  und in Mecklenburg allgemein gewordenen

peste, London, J Tuach, 1755.               Inoculation der Rindviehseuche, Hamburg, C W

14 Home, op. cit., note 7 above.           Meyn, 1779.

184

The Immunization of Cattle against Rinderpest

Gentleman's Magazine. They described their trials in great detail: in most cases they used
a thread or a wick soaked in the nasal or conjunctival secretions of infected animals; with
a needle they pierced the skin between two incisions in the buttocks and left the thread
under the skin; in some of their animals they used the contents of the omasum as
inoculum. Of the seventeen inoculated animals only three survived and one of these had
had the disease previously. In their publication the authors also mentioned another
experiment that had been done by Binkhorst in Leiden; no information was given about
the latter, except that he loved research; he had inoculated three one-year-old calves with
secretions from a recovering animal: all three had died. The authors concluded from these
disastrous results that inoculation could not be recommended; they tried to find an
explanation for their failure and wondered whether it would be possible to make the
operation less lethal by using a "weaker" inoculum. They referred to smallpox in which
inoculators always tried to take material from patients with a mild form of the disease.
They also wondered whether the disease could be made milder by adequate treatment of
the inoculated animals.17

In the April 1755 issue of the Gentleman's Magazine a letter appeared on the Dutch
experiments; it was signed 0.0. The author referred to a first trial in which a young ox
survived inoculation and was later shown to be immune. Thereupon the seventeen animals
mentioned above were purchased and the experiment carried out as described. The
investigators were not mentioned by name.18

Martinus Wilhelm Schwencke, professor of anatomy and surgery at the Hague, also
sent a report to the same magazine. He referred to the trial by Nozeman and others without
mentioning them, making it sound, perhaps unintentionally, as if he had done the trial
himself. He then continued: "However by varying the experiment I fell at last upon a
method which I think likely to answer, as far as I may judge by the success I had this
summer with six young beasts of between one and two years old, all of which being
inoculated at the same time, had the distemper in a mild degree and perfectly recovered
from it."19 He attributed his success to the use of Epsom salt. Schwencke later published
the results of some further trials in 1757.20

In a footnote to Schwencke's letter, the editor of the Gentleman's Magazine regretted
that in the meantime he had received no further details of the early trial in England, and
that no additional trials had been reported in his own country; he then remarked: "Upon
the first appearance of our magazine in Holland, the Dutch merchants at Amsterdam
instanfly set on foot a subscription for the purchase of a number of cattle all of which they
caused to be inoculated".21

A few further trials were in fact performed in England. Daniel Peter Layard, Fellow of the
Royal Society and at the time a medical practitioner in Huntingdon, in a letter read to the
Royal Society on 2 February 1758 referred to an experiment by the Dean of York on "five

17 Corneel Nozeman, Agge Roskam Kool and Jan  inoculating homed cattle', Gentleman's Mag., 1755,
Tak, Eerste proefneeming over de uitwerkingen van  25: 464.

de inentinge der besmettende ziekte in het rundvee  20 M W Schwencke, 'Proeven op het vee door
gedaan in de Beverwijk, Amsterdam, K van der Sys  inenting', Bremisches Mag. zur Ausbreitung der

and K de Veer, 1755.                     Wissensch., 1757, 1(47): 406, quoted by Camper, op.

18 O.O.: Letter from Amsterdam, Gentleman's  cit., note 31 below, p. 62.
Ma'. 1755, 25: 160.                       21 Ibid.

l M W Schwencke, 'Letter on the subject of

185

C Huygelen

beasts inoculated by means of a skein of cotton dipped in the matter and passed thro' a hole,
like a seaton, in the dew-lap." One of them, a pregnant cow, died, but the four others survived
and resisted reinfection when herded with diseased animals. A Mr Bewley, a surgeon of
repute in Lincolnshire, inoculated three animals; all three recovered after a mild disease and
were shown to be immune. Layard advocated inoculation, except for young calves and
pregnant cows, and made detailed recommendations on how to proCeed.22 TWO years
previously he had published a book on rinderpest in which, like most other authors, he had
stressed the analogy between the disease and smallpox.23 In the meantime the epizootic had
begun to recede in England and, consequently, the interest in inoculation declined. When in
the 1760s the epizootic caused enormous damage on the Continent, the English government
called upon Layard for advice; he recommended killing the affected animals and burying
them immediately. However, he still praised inoculation as a valuable prophylactic treatment,
based on his assumption that rinderpest was an eruptive fever of the variolous type. The total
number of inoculations in England appears to have been very limited and after 1780 the
English interest in rinderpest disappeared for nearly a century;24 almost all further
experimentation was done in the Netherlands, Northern Germany and Denmark.

Independently of the above mentioned early Dutch trials, Eelko Alta, a Friesian
clergyman in Boosum, had also started a trial on his own cattle in 1755, but all the
inoculated animals had died. Alta was not too discouraged, because he realized that he had
done his trial in a stable in which naturally infected animals were housed and that
therefore no valid conclusions could be drawn from these results. He interrupted his trials
for some time, but resumed them on two animals in December 1759. After blood-letting
and thorough purgation, he inoculated them with a very small amount of nasal discharge
from diseased cattle using a thread and a needle to perforate the skin, as he had done in
his first experiment. Both animals became ill, but survived. However, when exposed to
naturally infected cows, they became sick again, but less severely. Alta thought that
because he had used a small amount of inoculum the animals had been unable to get rid
of the virulent substance in their bodies. He published the results of his two trials in a book
on rinderpest, in which he refuted the ethical and theological objections to inoculation.25

In the Netherlands, as in most other European countries, the debate for and against
smallpox inoculation was very much alive in those years. The various aspects of this
debate have been thoroughly reviewed by Genevieve Miller, and more specifically for
France by Jean-Francois de Raymond and for the Netherlands by Jan Willem Buisman.26
The main arguments against inoculation were (a) medical: inoculation maintained the
disease in a given area because of spread from inoculated persons to others in the
neighbourhood; (b) ethical: nobody had the right to inflict intentionally a disease on

22 Daniel Peter Layard, 'A discourse on the  25 Eelko Alta, Verhandeling over de natuurlijke

usefulness of inoculation of the homed cattle to  oorzaken der ziekte onder het rundvee, Leeuwarden,
prevent the contagious distemper among them',  W Wigeri, 1765.

Philos. Trans., 1759, 50: 11.               26 Miller, op. cit., note 9 above, pp. 100-33; Jean-

23 Idem, Essay on the nature, causes, and cure of  Fran,ois de Raymond, Querelle de l'inoculation,

the contagious distemper among the horned catle,  Paris, J Vrin, 1982, pp. 55-6; Jan Willem Buisman,

London, Rivington, 1757.                  Tussen vroomheid en Verlichting, Zwolle, Waanders,

24 Charles F Mullett, 'The cattle distemper in  1992, pp. 129-55.
mid-eighteenth century England', Agric. Hist., 1946,
20: 144-65.

186

The Immunization of Cattle against Rinderpest

somebody else; and (c) theological: since disease was a divine punishment, trying to
prevent it by inoculation was acting against God's will.

In the rinderpest debate in Holland and elsewhere, very much the same arguments were
used by opponents of inoculation, with somewhat less emphasis on the ethical aspect,
since animals, not people, were involved. The proponents of inoculation considered
rinderpest inoculation to be medically justified since the disease had become enzootic and
all cattle ran a great risk of contracting it anyway by natural infection. As far as the
theological objections were concerned, Alta asked his opponents if they saw other
scourges of mankind, such as floods, also as divine punishments, and if so, why they
reinforced the dykes in order to prevent them.

In a postscript to his book, Alta referred to an article by Johannes Grashuis published in
1758, which he had not seen before. Grashuis was a physician in Hoorn, the author of several
scientific publications and a member of a number of local and foreign learned societies.
Grashuis had induced only a mild disease, but his animals were not protected, and four out
of six died when exposed later to natural infection.27 Alta's conclusion from his own limited
experience and that of Grashuis was that one could inoculate "too lightly" or "too heavily".
He remained optimistic and thought that with adequate inoculation procedures, it would be
possible to create gradually a more resistant breed of cattle, that would eventually replace
the more susceptible animals: he had noticed the higher resistance of calves from so-called
"gebeterde koeien", i.e. cows which had recovered from the disease.28

In the early 1760s Jan Engelman published an article on rinderpest, which is of interest
because he was probably the first author to observe the close similarity between rinderpest
and measles. He was a physician in Haarlem and one of the first members of the Dutch
Society of Sciences there. He described in detail fifteen points of analogy between the two
affections. Engelman thought that there were no solid arguments in favour of rinderpest
inoculation, because it was not caused by a "pox poison"; he added however the following
remark: "Suppose for a moment it was caused by a measles poison, and if one could safely
inoculate against rinderpest, would this mean that one could safely inoculate this measles
poison and, although no experiments in humans have been done, would one not be
inclined to inoculate human beings with it, and especially children?".29 At the time he
wrote this, Engelman was obviously unaware that Home had already published his results
of measles inoculation in Scotland.

Further Trials in the Netherlands

The interest in inoculation sharply increased again towards the end of the 1760s as a
result of severe losses in several parts -of the country. Some of the biggest names in Dutch
medicine became involved in the struggle against the epizootic, among them Pieter

27 J Grashuis, 'Berigt van de in-enting der  waar in het vaderland zig door de ziekte van het

besmettelijke ziekte onder het rund- vee', Uitgezogte  rundvee thans bevind, van zeer veel nut kunnen zijn,
Verhandelingen uit de Nieuwste Werken van de  Leeuwarden, H A de Chalmot, 1769.

Societeiten der Wetenschappen in Europa, 1758, 3:  29 J Engelman, 'Nader verhandeling over de
246-51.                                     rundveesterfte betreklijk tot de waarneemingen

28 Eelko Alta, Nodige raadgevingen aan    vervat in't VI de deel, II e stuk', Verhand. Holl.
overheden en ingezetenen dewelke in het bijzonder  Maatsch. Wetenschap., 1763, 7: 247-318.
voor den boer in deeze akelige omstandigheden,

187

C Huygelen

Camper, a professor at Groningen at the time. He was well known both in the Netherlands
and abroadi and a member of a long list of domestic and foreign learned societies.30 He
was a great advocate of smallpox inoculation and had written several publications on this
subject. He and his colleague Wouter van Doeveren, professor of physiology, pathology,
clinical medicine and chemistry at Groningen, had come to the conclusion that rinderpest,
like smallpox, would remain endemic, and that in this context, quarantine, isolation and
slaughtering policies would be ineffective; prophylactic inoculation remained the only
valid alternative.

In February 1769 Camper gave a series of four lectures in the Theatrum Anatomicum
in Groningen. In the first three he described the- anatomy of ruminant stomachs, and his
fourth lecture was devoted to rinderpest; he stressed the need for inoculation trials. In the
preface of his publication he stated that, at the time he started his experiments, he had been
unaware of Alta's work published four years before. Camper thought that one should not
be too discouraged by the negative results of early trials, because when smallpox
inoculation had started in England earlier in the century, morbidity and mortality had also
been high, mainly because the incisions were made too deep. With experience
accumulated over the years, inoculators had learned to make very small wounds and to use
minute amounts of infectious material and the results had improved significantly.31

In April 1769 Camper started a trial with van Doeveren in Groningen on 75 cows. The
results published by van Doeveren, were not very encouraging: 39 animals died and 36
recovered.32 Camper himself lost interest in the Groningen trial, apparently because of its
slow progress, and decided to start an experiment in Friesland, where a violent epizootic
was raging. This trial was supervised by Wijnold Munniks, who would later be a professor
at, and three times rector of, Groningen University, and the results were published the
same year.33 A total of 112 yearlings were inoculated, of whom 45 survived. The authors
found no difference between the mortality rates of those which had received an inoculum
from animals that had died of the disease, and those which had been inoculated with
material from animals which were recovering at the time it was taken. The surviving
yearlings proved to be immune when exposed to naturally infected cattle. The authors
were encouraged by their results and claimed that after natural infection only 20 to 28
animals would have survived instead of 45. From the practical viewpoint, they
recommended the use of nasal or conjunctival secretions as inoculum rather than saliva,
soaking a seven to eight inch thread in it and sticking it through the skin of the buttocks
or elsewhere, the inoculation site being of little importance; on the fifth or sixth day the
animals were to be given a purgative.

Independently, several others performed some trials in the same period. Two medical
doctors, G M Schutt and E J Romer, assisted by two surgeons, P Van Lankom and G

30 A Lange, 'Petrus Camper (1722-1789) en zijn  gemakkelijke, onkostbare en voordeelige manier te
betekenis voor de diergeneeskunde', Argos, 1990, no.  doen', in Eduard Sandifort (ed.), Natuur- en

2: 27-9.                                  Geneeskundige Bibliotheek, s'Gravenhage, P van

31 Pieter Camper, Lessen over de thans zweevende  Cleef, 1769, vol. 6, pp. 436-42.

veesterfte openlijk gehouden ... in het Theatrum  33 Petrus Camper and Wynold Munniks,

Anatomicum te Groningen, Leeuwarden, H A de  Voorloper van waarneemingen omtrent den uitslag
Chalmot, 1769.                            van de inentinge der besmettelijke veeziekte,

32 W van Doeveren, 'Raadgevingen om de  Leeuwarden, H A de Chalmot, 1769.
inentinge der ziekte van't rundvee, op eene

188

The Immunization of Cattle against Rinderpest

Greeve, obtained disastrous results in five experiments in the province of Utrecht. When
they heard of Camper's experiments, they published an open letter to him reporting their
data in detail.34 Johan Spruit, a surgeon, also carried out a few experiments with variable
results.35 In June 1769 Johannes de Vries, a provincial surgeon in Leeuwarden, started
inoculation trials in Langweer at the request of the authorities; his results were disastrous:
39 out of 53 inoculated animals died, but he had apparently been experimenting in a
contaminated environment. In various experiments performed in Friesland between
November 1769 and January 1770 a total of 330 animals were inoculated and 156 of them
recovered.36 Faced with all these negative results, with both inoculation and various other
types of treatment, the Friesian authorities concluded in November 1769 that the cause of
rinderpest was God's displeasure with the sinful behaviour of the Friesian people, and 15
November was proclaimed a day of prayer and fasting.

As a direct consequence of the negative results recorded in different parts of the
country, the interest in rinderpest inoculation declined sharply in the Netherlands.
Henricus Vink, professor of anatomy and surgery at the Rotterdam Medical School, gave
a series of lectures in Rotterdam in October 1769; he was opposed to inoculation and
strongly disagreed with Camper and Munniks. The latter had claimed that even if the post-
inoculation losses were high, the farmers gained by it, because the recovered animals
fetched a much higher price. This led to fraud, however, and quite a few fully susceptible
cows were sold as having recovered. Vink also questioned the calculations made by
Camper and Munniks on the comparative mortality rates of inoculated animals versus
those which would have succumbed if exposed to natural infection, claiming that under
natural conditions 100 per cent of the animals would in no circumstances have been
infected.37

Reinders' Experiments in the Netherlands

In this climate of discouragement and scepticism, Geert Reinders, a farmer in the
province of Groningen and a self-taught man, decided to continue the experiments.38 He
contacted Camper, and in collaboration with Munniks, carried out several trials with
variable success in the 1769-1770 period. In some cases the mortality rate after
inoculation was extremely high, in others the animals did not become resistant to
subsequent infection, or developed severe local infections at the inoculation site. The
authors tried different inoculation procedures and a variety of treatments to alleviate the
symptoms, all of them without any measurable effect. Out of the 150 inoculated cattle 86

34 G J Schutt, E J Romer, P van Lanckom and  Friesland gedurende de 18 de eeuw', Argos, 1994,
G Greeve, Brief aan den Hoog Geleerden Heere  no. 10: 315-23.

Petrus Camper beheizende eenige proeven omtrent  37 H Vink, Lessen over de herkauwing der

de inentinge der besmettelijke veeziekte, genomen in  runderen en tans woedende veeziekte, Rotterdam,
de Vrijheid van Utrecht, Utrecht, G B Timon van  Arrenberg, 1770, pp. 86-101.

Paddenburg, 1770.                              38 A van der Schaaf, 'Geert Reinders

35 Johan Spruit, 'Brief van den Heer Joh. Spruit,  (1737-1815). A founder of the practical application
Heelmeester te Nichtwegt, aan den Schrijver,  of immunology in the fight against infectious

behelzende eenige waarneemingen over de inenting  diseases in animals', Hist. Med. vet., 1978, 3: 89-98,
van de ziekte der runderen', in Sandifort, op. cit.,  and L H Bruins, Geert Reinders, Leven en werk van
note 32 above, p. 899.                       de grondlegger van de inmmunologie, Assen, van

36 J de Vries, 'De bestrijding van de runderpest in  Gorcum, 1951.

189

C Huygelen

recovered and 64 died. They reached three conclusions from their work: (a) infectious
material taken from a diseased animal on the second, third or fourth day of sickness,
always produced rinderpest; (b) inoculated animals which had shown typical symptoms,
were always immune to reinfection even when the symptoms had been mild; and (c) the
mode of inoculation and the various therapies used had no impact on the results.

Reinders resumed his experiments in 1774, concentrating on the inoculation of calves
from cows that had recovered from rinderpest. He was in all probability the first to make
practical use of maternally derived immunity. In rinderpest most, but not all, calves lose
their colostrum derived antibodies by the age of nine to ten months; some lose theirs at a
much earlier age.39 As for other morbillivirus diseases, there is great individual variation
related directly to the antibody titres of the individual mothers.

In an open letter to Camper and Munniks, Reinders reported his observation that calves
from immune dams did not become susceptible to the contagion before they were put out
in the open air in the spring. He had discussed this phenomenon with them several times
between 1769 and 1774, but had not been able to generate much interest on their part. He
had therefore decided to embark upon trials on his own and had inoculated calves from
cows which had had the disease five years previously; the calves had been inoculated
when six to eight weeks old and while still indoors; they had shown only very mild
reactions. Some of them had been reinoculated after they had been out in the pastures for
four to five weeks and had shown some very mild symptoms on the sixth day after
inoculation; they were later shown to be resistant to natural infection. Reinders invited
Camper and Munniks to repeat his experiments.40 The detailed results of his trials were
published in 1776 and reprinted in 1777 together with his 1774 letter to Camper and
Munniks"41 Reinders had gone through a difficult time while carrying out these trials: he
had been attacked by zealots who accused him of atheism because he acted against God's
will.

Although Alta had briefly referred to the higher resistance of calves from recovered
cows, he had attributed it to a kind of hereditary resistance. Reinders came much closer to
the true explanation with his observation that the resistance of the calf depended only on
the immune status of the dam and was not influenced by that of the bull. He had also
noticed that once a cow had recovered from the disease, all the calves she bore afterwards
were initially resistant, irrespective of the time since her recovery. He also noticed that,
after having spent half a year in the open air, these calves became as susceptible as calves
from non-immune dams. Since virtually all calves were born in the early part of the year,
they would have lost their maternally derived immunity and become susceptible towards
the end of the summer. Initially, Reinders had wrongly attributed this decline of resistance
to exposure to the open air, but he soon realized that this factor was unrelated.42

39 R D Brown, 'Rinderpest immunity in calves-a  41 Idem, Waarneemingen en proeven meest door
review', Bull. epizoot. Dis. Afr. 1958, 6: 127-33; W  inentinge op het rundvee gedaan, dienende ten

Plowright, 'Rinderpest virus', in S Gard, C Hallauer  bewijze, dat wij onze kalvers van gebeterde koejen
and K F Meyer (eds), Virology Monographs No. 3,  geboren, door inentinge tegen de veepest kunnen

Vienna and New York, Springer, 1968.       beveiligen, Groningen, L Huisingh, 1776 (reprinted

40 Geert Reinders, Brief aan den Wel Edelen  1777).

Hooggeleerden Heere Petrus Camper en aan ...  42 Interference of maternally derived antibodies
Wyn. Munnicks weegens eene voorname ontdekkinge  with active immunization using parenterally

door inentinge op het rundvee gedaan, Groningen, L  administered live attenuated virus vaccines is a well
Huisingh, 1774.                            known problem today, especially in measles and

190

The Immunization of Cattle against Rinderpest

Reinders found out that in order to increase his chances of success, he had to inoculate
the calves two or three times at different ages. He predicted, rather optimistically, that with
his method of repeated inoculations, a resistant cattle population could be created, not
only in his own country, but throughout Europe. The main problem he foresaw, was the
supply of enough infectious matter to keep inoculating.

His inoculation procedure did not differ much from what had been used previously:
infectious material was obtained from nasal discharge on the second to fourth day of
illness, a thread was soaked in it and then with a needle drawn through a fold of loose skin,
usually in the buttocks; the thread was removed 4 to 5 days later. He recommended three
inoculations routinely: the first one in the stable, preferably at the age of six weeks, the
second when the calves had been outdoors for three or four weeks and the third in August
or September. Reinders' chances of success may have been greatly increased because of
unintentional contact of the inoculum with the nasal and oral mucosae of the calves
through licking of the wounds or otherwise.

Reinders' example was followed by Jan Hendrick Stolte, a local physician in Zwolle,
using 120 calves from immune dams: 20 of them died, but 4 of these were presumed by
the author to have succumbed to an intercurrent disease; of the other 100 animals 48 were
inoculated a second and a third time without showing signs of illness.43

The publication of Reinders' work generated renewed interest in inoculation, because
his results were much better than those obtained previously in other cattle.44 In 1780 the
Amsterdamsche Maatschappij ter Bevordering van den Landbouw (Amsterdam Society
for the Advancement of Agriculture), published the results of a survey: 1,829 inoculated
animals had survived, i.e. 90 per cent.45 The total figures for the period 1777 to 1781
showed 3,373 survivors out of 3,796 inoculated animals, i.e. 89 per cent.46 These figures
compared very favourably with the survival rate after natural infection in the 1769-1776
period, i.e. only 126,307 out of 438,045, 29 per cent. In 1784 more than half the calves
born in some parts of Friesland were inoculated.47

Judging from a publication in 1778, Reinders' trials appear to have been well
organized: in this document he stipulated the "Conditions under which the Inoculation
Society, established at Garnwert, proposes to supply calves which have recovered from

canine distemper. The young cannot be immunized
as long as the antibodies have not declined below a
certain threshold; the age at which this threshold is
reached is entirely dependent on the initial titre,

which in turn depends on the titre of the mother; this
leads to wide individual variation in the ages at

which infants or young animals can be successfully
immunized. The problem can be partially overcome
by increasing the number of vaccinations, thus

enhancing the chances of injecting the vaccine at a

time when the antibodies have sufficienfly declined.
Another possible approach is to administer the

vaccine via the nasal mucosa, but this approach is
greatly hampered by the decreased tropism of

attenuated measles and distemper viruses for this

mucosa. In rinderpest Brown demonstrated in 1958
(op. cit., note 39 above) that after parenteral

inoculation of live caprinised (= goat-adapted) virus

all calves with a neutralizing antibody titre of 100.7
or less responded actively; those with titres of 100.7

to 102.2 could sometimes be infected, sometimes not.

43 Johan Hendrick Stolte, Schreiben wegen
Einimpfung des jungen Rindviehes, dated 1

November 1777 and published with Schumacher's
book, see note 53 below.

44 Geert Reinders, Bericht uit Holland, Friesland
en de provintie van Stad en Lande, wegens de

inenting der kalveren van gebeterde koejen voor den
jaare 1776, Groningen, L Huisingh, 1777.

45 Eelko Alta, 'Bericht van de inenting der

kalveren', Verhand. Maatsch. ter bevordering van
den Landbouw, Amsterdam, 1780, 2 (Iste stuk):
125-64.

46 J M G van der Poel, Heren en Boeren,
Wageningen, Veenman, 1949.

4 Van der Schaaf, op. cit., note 38 above.

191

C Huygelen

the disease versus non-immune ('ongebeterde') calves". Not only were the financial
conditions clearly spelled out, but also the required age and other specifications.48

Reinders' results were summarized by Camper in a paper to the Societ6 Royale de
Medecine in Paris, but no reference was made to Reinders.49 According to Camper, apart
from secretions, meat, blood or a piece of skin could also be used as inoculum. He also
presented a lengthy paper to the Berlin Gesellschaft Naturforschender Freunde, again
without giving due credit to Reinders.50 Camper made a plea for generalized
immunization and recommended to governments the creation and maintenance at their
expense of non-immune herds to serve as a reservoir for the production of the inoculum.
His recommendations met with little success in the majority of European countries
because they were already applying the eradication method.

In the Netherlands the interest in rinderpest inoculation declined in the 1780s because
the epizootic itself decreased in intensity. When it reappeared in 1797 in Gelderland,
Rudolph Forsten, a professor of medicine at Harderwijk, recommended inoculation under
certain conditions, but stated in the same article that killing affected animals could be very
efficient, as shown by the results in other countries.51

Inoculation in Other Countries

Apart from the United Dutch Provinces, Northern Germany and Denmark were the only
other regions where inoculation was used to any significant level. The situation in 1779
was reviewed in detail by Claus Dethloff von Oertzen52 and by W Schumacher.53 The
former was "Oberhauptmann" in the dukedom of Mecklenburg-Schwerin; the latter was
also an officer in the same dukedom and member of the Konigliche Grossbrittanische
Landwirtschaftsgesellschaft (Royal British Agricultural Association) in Celle. Von
Oerzen quotes extensively an anonymous article published in Brunswick in 1763, in
which inoculation was advocated because, even if the losses were high, the quarantine
period could be much shortened because all animals would go through the disease at the
same time, whereas in a naturally occurring epizootic these measures had to remain in
place for several months.54

During the epizootic of the late 1770s Mecklenburg became the focus of inoculation
experiments in Germany. The trials started on a large estate owned by Herr von Bulow,
Royal Danish Kammerunker, after the rinderpest invasion of 1776. On some farms the

48 Geert Reinders, Conditien op welke de
Inentings Societeit, te Garnwert opgeregt,

presenteert, kalveren welke van de besmeuelijke
veeziekte zijn gebeterd, te leveren, tegens

ongebeterde kalvers, Garnwert, 16 June 1778

(published as a supplement to his earlier book, see
note 41 above).

49 Petrus Camper, 'M6moire sur l'epizootie de la
Hollande', Soc. roy. Med., 12 Aug. 1777.

50 Petrus Camper, 'Ueber die wahre und

eigentliche Ursache der Krankheiten, die unter dem
grossen und kleinen Viehe als ansteckende Seuchen,
wiuthen', Besch4ft. d. Berlinischen Gesellsch.
Naturforsch. Freunde, 1779, 4: 95-166.

51 R Forsten, De vee-pest welke zich in het

Quartier van Nymegen geopenbaart heeft ... waar
bij gevoegd is voorbehoed en geneeskundig advys
over dezelve vee- pest, uitgebragt door de

Geneeskundige Faculteit te Harderwyk, Anhem, van
Goor, 1797.

52 Von Oertzen, op. cit., note 16 above.

53 W Schumacher, Die sichersten Mittel wider die
Gefahr beym Eintritte der Rindvieseuche aus

Erfahrungen und Urkunden bestatiget 1777, 2nd ed.
Berlin, Oemigke, 1793.

54 Anon., Versuch einer ndhern Erklaerung der

Hornviehseuche nebst einigen Wahrnehmungen aiber
die Einpropfung derselben, Braunschweig, 1763
(quoted by von Oertzen, op. cit., note 16 above).

192

The Immunization of Cattle against Rinderpest

disease was associated with relatively low mortality and neighbours brought their cattle to
these farms to be infected with this "mild" form. Von Bulow started doing inoculation
trials in 1777 using this benign inoculum. In the first experiments the mortality was high,
but von Biilow persevered and in one of the subsequent trials 22 of 25 cattle survived. He
continued his trials in 1778 and also observed that calves from immune dams reacted only
slightly or not at all, even when they were inoculated three times. He was probably aware
of the Dutch experience.

Von Oertzen attributed the relatively favourable results obtained by von Billow to the
benign nature of the infection; the inoculated animals became sick on only the ninth or
tenth day instead of the fifth day when inoculated with more virulent material. A total of
135 out of the 177 cattle inoculated by von Billow had survived when von Oertzen started
his own experiment with "benign" material, and generally, but not always, with good
results.

Inoculations became more and more generalized in Mecklenburg and "insurance
companies" were created which provided inoculation in special "institutes" on the
following conditions: the owners were invited to estimate the value of their cattle; the
animals were then placed in inoculation stables and inoculated; if an animal died the
owner received the estimated price as compensation; if it survived, the farmer had to pay
half the value before he received it back after recovery. Von Oertzen mentioned that at the
time he was writing his book, the "insurance companies" had already reduced their price
to one third of the value. According to Worseck the inoculation institutes in Mecklenburg
were private initiatives created with full encouragement from the authorities.55

Both von Oertzen and Schumacher described in detail the procedures to be used for
inoculation. These corresponded roughly to those used in the Netherlands, but von
Oertzen insisted in particular on the choice of a benign inoculum. Pregnant cows and
calves under six months were excluded. Between 15 and 40 healthy cattle were brought
together in the inoculation stables and usually inoculated by an incision in the upper part
of the flank; threads infected with nasal secretions were laid in the wound, which was then
covered with a plaster; care was taken to prevent the animals from licking the wound; the
threads were removed on the sixth day.

Storage of the inoculum was a problem: in summer it could not be held for more than
an average of five or six days, in winter two weeks; von Oertzen wrapped the infected
cotton or linen threads up in wax paper and put them in an apothecary's box. Schumacher
recommended burying them in a dry place in the ground.

A survey in Mecklenburg on the mortality post inoculation demonstrated that the
overall results were good, even when the less successful experiments were included. In
total 3,241 of 4,075 inoculated cattle fully recovered; 438 died and 290 were still sick at
the time of the survey, but 106 of them only slightly.56 Apart from von Billow and von
Oertzen, Jacob Brackenwagen also carried out several successful trials. He was a farmer
on royal estates in Glambeck.57 Schumacher's book contains several practical
recommendations and contributions by Brackenwagen.58

55 M Worseck, 'Die Bekampfung der Rinderpest  57 H Kilian, 'Die Bekaimpfung der Rinderpest in
vor 200 Jahren in Mecklenburg', Mh. Vet. Med.  Mecklenburg-Strelitz (1769- 1780)', Inaugural
1977, 32: 182-4.                       Dissertation Veterinary Medicine, Berlin, 1934.

56 Von Oertzen, op. cit., note 16 above.  58 Schumacher, op. cit., note 53 above.

193

C Huygelen

The Mecklenburg experience with inoculation stables was watched with interest by
neigbouring states: Prussia authorized some experiments in the years 1779-178 1, but
inoculation apparently never became widespread there.59 In a series of articles in a local
magazine in Hanover inoculation was promoted and an appeal made to create a state-
owned inoculation institute.60 In 1779, J A Kersting, a veterinarian at the Hanover
Veterinary School, which had been created the year before, was sent on an official mission
to Gartau to study the procedures used in Mecklenburg. He wrote a detailed report which
was published after his death.61 During his stay 135 animals were inoculated of which 7
died. In his recommendations, which followed closely those of von Oertzen and
Schumacher, Kersting insisted on taking the nasal secretions of the individual animals
separately, on noting carefully the name or the number of the donor animal and on always
using material from an animal that had shown mild symptoms; he also stressed the
importance of using only animals in good health for the propagation of the inoculum.
Overall, the losses in the inoculation institutes in Mecklenburg did not exceed 10 per
cent.62

In the German-speaking countries many remained opposed to inoculation. Johann
Gottlieb Wolstein was against it; he was a professor and director of the Animal Hospital
in Vienna and founder of the Vienna Veterinary School; he was also opposed to
slaughtering but did not come up with a clear viable alternative.63 Others claimed that
there was no difference between benign and severe epizootics and that the whole outcome
depended on the circumstances and on the constitution of individual animals.

Rinderpest had virtually disappeared from Mecklenburg by 1792 when Schumacher
wrote the preface to the second edition of his work; he thought it useful to re-edit his
recommendations, however, since the epizootic was still raging in other regions.64 During
the Franco-German wars at the end of the century rinderpest reinvaded Germany but little
use was then made of inoculation. It could only be applied by special permission.65
Gottfried Christian Reich, professor of pharmacy at Erlangen, was probably one of the last
advocates of inoculation. In his own experiment almost all the inoculated animals
survived.66

In Denmark a first series of inoculation experiments was done at royal expense in the
years 1770 to 1772 and reported in detail by Johann Clemens Tode, a doctor of pharmacy
and professor at the University of Copenhagen; most trials were done on the island of
Avnoe.67 In the first year 61 animals were inoculated, most of which succumbed to the
infection; in 1771 160 were inoculated, of which 91 became infected, one died, and 68 did

59 W Dieckerhoff, Geschichte der Rinderpest und  Seuchen, Vienna, J E von Kurzbeck, 1782.
ihrer Literatur. Beitrag zur Geschichte der    " Schumacher, op. cit., note 53 above.
vergleichenden Pathologie, Berlin, Enslin, 1890.  65 J J Kausch, Kameralprinzipien aber

0H M Wens, 'Beitrag zu der Inoculation der  Rindviehsterben, Berlin, 1793 (quoted by
Rinderpest nach den Anweisungen von J.A. Kersting  Dieckerhoff, op. cit., note 59 above).

in den Jahren 1779 bis 1781', Dtsch. tierdrztl.  66 Gottfried Christian Reich, Richtige und

Wschr., 1987, 94: 559-62.                    gewissenhafte Belehrung fur den Landnann aber die

61 Gunther jun, 'Kersting, uber die Einimpfung  Rindviehseuche und die Inoculation derselben,
der Rinderpest', Mag. f die ges. Thierheilk., 1858,  Nurnberg, Raspesche Buchhandlung, 1797.

24: 1-42.                                      67 Johann Clemens Tode, Geschichte der

62 Schumacher, op. cit., note 53 above.    Einimpfungen der Hornviehseuchen welche in den

63 Johann Gottlieb Wolstein, Annerkungen iiber  Jahren 1770, 71 und 72 in Danemark auf konigliche
die Viehseuchen in Oesterreich nebst einer   Kosten angestellet worden, Copenhagen, Rothen,
Abhandlung gegen das Umbringen der Thiere in  1775.

194

The Immunization of Cattle against Rinderpest

not show any symptoms; in 1772 169 animals were inoculated, 123 of them recovered, 2
died and 44 showed no signs of disease. Extensive trials were started in 1777 under the
supervision of Peter Christian Abildgaard, later Dean of the Copenhagen Veterinary
School.68 Out of 1199 inoculated cattle 38 remained healthy, 580 became ill and
recovered, and 581 died. His results corresponded roughly to those reported by Camper in
the Netherlands.

In Sweden inoculation was strongly opposed by the well-known scientist Peter Jonas
Bergius, a botanist and doctor of medicine, and professor of natural history at Stockholm,
who claimed that rinderpest was similar to human plague; since plague could infect a
human being several times over, it would be impossible to protect cattle by inoculation.69
In France, F6lix Vicq d'Azyr, who became very actively involved in the struggle against
rinderpest, carried out a trial, but almost all the inoculated animals died.70 In the majority
of European countries the struggle against the disease was based upon stamping it out,
sometimes with minimal losses, in other cases with heavy sacrifices. This method was
applied successfully in, for example, England and the Austrian Netherlands (roughly
today's Belgium).71

In the nineteenth century rinderpest inoculation was no longer practised in Western or
Central Europe, but for several decades it remained popular in parts of Russia.72

Conclusions and Comments

Inoculation was not a valid solution to the immense problem created by the rinderpest
invasion of Europe in the eighteenth century. Not only were the losses after inoculation in
many instances too high, but, even more importantly, the procedure perpetuated the
circulation of the causal agent in the cattle population. From the scientific point of view,
however, the inoculation pioneers made some significant contributions to our knowledge
in those very early days of active immunization against infectious diseases.

The rinderpest experience proved that smallpox was not unique in being preventable by
inoculation and that the procedure provided lifelong protection. It confirmed the concepts
of those who saw infectious diseases as caused by specific etiological agents; in this
context Camper's statement sounded very modern when he wrote

that each kind of contagious epizootic in cattle comes from a specific germ or material, which
always causes the same attacks of disease and that this matter is spread everywhere by the air as a
general vehicle and through inhalation to the lungs, sometimes also with the nasal mucus or with the
saliva, or with the intake of food, it is brought into the body and mixes with the blood.73

" Peter Christian Abildgaard, 'Abhandlung uber  maladies pestilentielles des bites a' comes, Paris,
die allgemeine Rindviehseuche in vorztiglicher  Mrigot, 1776.

Hinsicht auf ihre Einfalle in Danemark und die  71 R De Herdt, Bijdrage tot de geschiedenis van
daselbst angestellten Impfversuche' in Erich Viborg,  de veeteelt in Vlaanderen, inzonderheid tot de

Sammlung von Abhandlungen fur Thierdrzte und  geschiedenis van de rundveepest 1769-1785, Leuven
Oekonomen, vol. 1, Copenhagen, Prost, 1795.   and Ghent, Belgisch Centrum voor de Landelijke

69 Peter Jonas Bergius, Bedenklichkeiten bei der  Geschiedenis, 1970.

Einimpfung der Hornviehseuche Gottingen, 1772  72 Peter Jessen, Ueber die ganzliche Ausrottung
(quoted by Dieckerhoff, op. cit., note 59 above).  der Rinderpest, Dorpat, H Laakmann, 1852.

70 Felix Vicq d'Azyr, Exposi des moyens curatifs  73 Camper, op. cit., note 50 above.
et preservatifs qui peuvent etre employes contre les

195

C Huygelen

The observation by Reinders and Stolte, that calves from recovered cows were resistant
represented probably the first recognition in any species of the phenomenon of maternally
derived immunity. Reinders noticed that this resistance was not of hereditary origin, that
it depended solely on the immunity of the dam, that it subsided with the increasing age of
the calf and that this happened much earlier in some calves than in others; he also noticed
that the immunity gradually disappeared leaving the calves just as susceptible as those
from dams who had not had the disease. He took advantage of this temporary resistance
to inoculate calves with minimal risk and he realized that he increased his chances of
successful inoculation by repeating the procedure at different ages, because in some of the
calves the first inoculation would not produce a "take".

It is interesting to note that for two morbillivirus infections the same procedures would
be "reinvented" a century and a half later. In 1915 Charles Herrman, Attending
Paediatrician to the Lebanon Hospital in New York, tried to develop a practical
immunization method against measles by inoculating a naturally occurring virus into
infants with maternally derived immunity,74 and in 1924 Doutresoulle, a French veterinary
surgeon in Niger, inoculated rinderpest in calves from immune dams.75 Neither method
had any widespread application because of the wide variation in immune status of the
individual infant or calf.

Naturally occurring rinderpest virus strains are known to have a variable degree of
virulence.76 The Mecklenburg investigators apparently used this phenomenon with some
success by systematically selecting less virulent material in their inoculation institutes.
Also, as a rule, they used material derived from previously inoculated animals. The total
number of passages, however, probably remained very limited and it seems unlikely that
this would have resulted in any significant further attenuation of the virus, as suggested
by Wens.77

The idea of inoculation against rinderpest and later against measles, was based upon the
presumed similarity of these diseases with smallpox; in the latter disease inoculation in
most cases would produce a skin eruption and, relatively speaking, less involvement of the
respiratory tract and, hence, much less morbidity and mortality than in natural disease. It
was hoped that for rinderpest and measles a similar strategy could be developed, but
morbilliviruses behave in a very different way from poxviruses and in spite of many
attempts the dermal inoculation principle has never found any general application for
either of these two diseases.78 For both of them reliable attenuated virus vaccines did not
become available before the second half of the twentieth century.

74 Charles Hernnan, 'Immunization against  77 Wens, op. cit., note 60 above.

measles', Arch. Pediatr., 1915, 32: 503-7.   78 C Huygelen, 'The long prehistory of modem

75 Doutresoulle, 'Rapport sur la recherche d'une  measles vaccination', in S A Plotkin and B Fantini
m6thode d'immunisation active des veaux non  (eds), Vaccinia, vaccination, vaccinology,

sevres, provenant de meres refractaires h la peste  International Meeting on the History of Vaccinology,
bovine', Rec. Med. vet., 1924, 100: 464-8.  Marnes-la-Coquette, 6-8 Dec., 1995, Amsterdam,

76 Scott, op. cit., note 2 above.         Elsevier, 1996, pp. 257-63.

196
