
Book Reviews

MARGARET HUMPHREYS, Yellow fever and the South, Health and Medicine in American
Society series, New Brunswick, NJ, Rutgers University Press, 1992, pp. x, 226, $45.00 (0-8135-
1820-2).

Histories of public health tend to avoid detailed analysis of the origins and context of public health
reform, and histories of specific diseases often fail to see their subject in a wider economic and
political setting. Margaret Humphreys' fascinating study of the impact of yellow fever on
American's southern States between 1840 and 1905 amply demonstrates how such contextual
frameworks enrich our understanding of historical processes. Most accounts of local yellow fever
epidemics are of essentially local interest; but Humphreys explores the common experience of the
South to show that the disease had a decisive influence on the development of both Southern and
federal public health policy.

Three factors combined to turn yellow fever into a driving force for sanitary reform in the
nineteenth-century South: the nature of the disease itself; the rise of a national business network; and
federal designs on the autonomy of individual States.

Yellow fever is a highly virulent and singularly unpleasant disease. In the nineteenth-century
South it occurred in frequent, seasonal, but unpredictable epidemics. Initially confined to the coastal
cities, it demonstrated an unnerving ability to travel into their hinterlands once the railroads became
established. Because it had a devastating effect on trade, local authorities and local businessmen
initiated sanitary reforms with a view to reducing its impact. Because such measures involved
several States, and the imposition of coastal quarantines affected international trade, the federal
health authority (the Marine Hospital Service) was determined to wrest responsibility for yellow
fever controls from the local health boards. The whole attention of southern public health effort after
1870 was focused on yellow fever, and when the disease disappeared after 1905, general public
health provision in the South stood revealed as abysmal.

Humphreys is medically trained and has an evident professional interest in the structure and
practice of public health, but she is also an able professional historian. Yellow Fever and the South is
clearly written and cogently argued (though poorly edited), and is a rewarding read. It raises the
local history of yellow fever well above the antiquarian level of the existing historiography, and
offers stimulating perspectives into the relationships between disease and public health on the one
hand, and political and economic history on the other.

Anne Hardy, Wellcome Institute


454
