
Book Reviews

Michael Clark and Catherine Crawford
(eds), Legal medicine in history, Cambridge
History of Medicine series, Cambridge

University Press, 1994, pp. xi, 364, ?40.00
$59.95 (0-521-39514-3).

Michael Clark and Catherine Crawford's

collection of essays, Legal medicine in history,
is a timely contribution to the growing

literature on the relations between medicine

and law in the early modem and modem

periods. While the essays do not constitute a

comprehensive survey of the relations between
law and medicine even in England, they do

largely succeed in providing "a set of studies
of the place of legal medicine in the social,

legal, administrative and political histories of

societies in which it has been practised" (p. 1).
Indeed, one of the many strengths of the

volume is its focus less on details of forensic
medicine than on the changes in status of

medical expertise in law and the varied uses to
which medical knowledge could be put within
particular legal and administrative systems.

The essays in the first half of the collection,
dealing roughly with the period 1650-1850,
are particularly well integrated and mutually
resonant. Crawford's own excellent

contribution provides a framework for

understanding the structural impediments to the
development of legal medicine within common
law contexts during the early modem period.

Crawford argues that the Continental Roman-
canon system, based on judicially-led

inquisitorial methods, was structured to foster
legal scholarship and to rely on the testimony
of experts of all sorts, including physicians, a
process that resulted in medico-legal expertise
being both valued and rewarded. In contrast,
she finds, common law practices, based on

jury-led decisions requiring no justification and
on immediate oral testimony, provided scant

space for considered expert opinion or for the
written elaboration of technical arguments.

While not disputing Crawford's contentions
about the structural implications of common

law, the essays by Helen Brock and Crawford,
David Harley, and Mark Jackson none the less
demonstrate that during the period 1650-1850
medical testimony came to be relied on more

regularly, especially during coroners' inquests.
With this increased presence, they also

contend, came an appreciation that medical

testimony could be used "to introduce doubt as
well as clarity into legal proceedings", thereby
allowing juries to temper the severity of laws
that no longer seemed consonant with public
opinion. Jackson's study of infanticide in

England and Mary Nagel Wessling's account

246

Book Reviews

of similar trials in Wurttemburg are especially
perspicacious on this point. In a completely
different vein, Joel Peter Eigen's essay on
insanity and English law during the period

1800-1840 also depicts a situation in which

criminal or civil law could be tempered, a role
that medicine would continue to play nearly a
century later, as Barbara Brookes and Paul

Roth found in their study of the Bourne case
and the medicalization of abortion.

Perhaps not surprisingly, the cohesive quality
of the first half of Legal medicine in history is

much less apparent in the second part. Covering
a period when the connections between law and
medicine have become much more routine and
substantial, the collection fragments into a

series of individual studies of particular aspects
of the complex ways in which law and

medicine have intersected. Among the most
interesting is Stephen Watson's Foucauldian
examination of the prison as a site for the

production of expert knowledge about mental
deficiency, a tale that highlights the ways in
which the legal system itself could structure
observations under which new medical

conditions would become visible and real.

On the whole, Legal medicine in history is a
highly successful collection. While it might

have been improved by maintaining its focus
on England and certainly by expanding its

coverage of material in the period 1850 to the
present, it does an excellent job of raising

some important questions about the relations
between medicine and law in England and of
providing acute insights into the connections
between developments in legal medicine and
the social/political/cultural worlds in which
these changes were taking place.

John Carson, Wellcome Institute

247
